# GAM-Paediatric-Resp-ED
Generalized additive model for air pollution and paediatric ED visits for respiratory diseases across the pre, during, and post COVID-19 lockdown periods in Malaysia

These r codes were used in the analysis for the article "MODELLING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AIR POLLUTION AND RESPIRATORY-RELATED EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT VISITS AMONG CHILDREN ACROSS THE PRE, DURING, AND POST-LOCKDOWN PERIODS IN MALAYSIA"

Afiqah Syamimi Masrani1, Nik Rosmawati Nik Husain1, Kamarul Imran Musa1, Paula Moraga2

Abstract
Background: The lockdowns imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in improved air quality in many regions. This may have positive effects on the respiratory health of children, who are vulnerable to air pollution. Therefore, we aim to model and compare the relationship between air pollution and paediatric emergency department (ED) visits for respiratory diseases across the three periods of before, during, and after the lockdown in Malaysia. 

Method: We conducted a time series analysis to compare the daily data of paediatric respiratory ED visits from two tertiary hospitals in Malaysia across three periods defined by the lockdown, or the Movement Control Order (MCO), in Malaysia. The three periods are pre-MCO (17 March 2017 to 17 March 2020), MCO (18 March 2020 to 2 January 2022), and post-MCO (3 January 2022 to 17 March 2022). The predictor variables include particulate matter less than 10µm (PM10), particulate matter less than 2.5 µm (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulphur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide, and ozone (O3). The response variables are the paediatric respiratory ED visits and the respiratory disease subtypes, whilst daily temperature, rainfall, and windspeed are the confounding variables. We used a generalised additive model to examine the relationship between air pollution and paediatric respiratory ED visit changed after the MCO, while controlling for the meteorological variables.

Results: In total, 52,704 paediatric respiratory ED visits were recorded in the five-year period with more than half (n=33,238, 63.1%) being children below 5 years. Generally, air pollution concentrations show a reducing trend during the MCO period except for PM10 and SO2 in Kota Bharu where the concentration peaked, and the trend decreases, respectively. Air pollution explained 69.9% (R2= 0.62) of the variation in the total paediatric ED visits for respiratory disease in Kota Bharu and 53.0% (R2 = 0.49) in Johor Bahru. In Kota Bharu, air pollution is the most associated with acute upper respiratory infection in the pre-MCO (PM10: edf = 6.44, p<0.001); NO2:       edf = 7.66, p<0.001; SO2: edf = 1.72, p<0.01) and the post-MCO period (NO2: edf = 1.00, p<0.05; SO2: edf = 2.09, p<0.05; CO: edf = 1.00, p<0.01; O3: edf = 1.00, p<0.05) as compared to chronic lower respiratory diseases during the MCO period (SO2: edf = 1.00, p<0.01; CO: edf = 1.00, p<0.05, O3: edf = 1.00, p<0.05). Contrarily, in Johor Bahru, although air pollution is most associated with lower respiratory infection, the individual air pollutants’ relationship changes across all three periods of pre-MCO (SO2: edf = 3.59, p<0.05; CO: edf = 1.00 p<0.05), MCO (PM10: edf = 1.36, p<0.01; SO2: edf = 1.92, p<0.05; CO: edf = 1.92, p<0.05, O3: edf = 4.00, p<0.001), and post-MCO (CO: edf = 1.00, p<0.05)

Conclusion: The lockdown revealed the impact of short-term, outdoor air pollution on children’s respiratory health. The inclusion of measures to reduce indoor air pollution should be considered in the national pandemic preparedness plan. This calls for cooperation among individuals, society, and authorities to adopt cleaner and greener practices and policies for better air quality and health.
Keywords: Air pollution, children, respiratory disease, emergency department visit, COVID-19, lockdown
